NORTHWIND TECHNOLOGIES
Suite C -- what it will actually take

Prepared by:  Marcus Reyes
Date:         29 August 2018
Status:       Internal

John asked for a number and a date.  I went and looked, because we do not have
either written down anywhere I would trust.

Four and a half years since we signed the room.  Last time I wrote this down
was September 2014.


WHAT I DID

Walked the room with a clamp meter and read every PDU by hand.  Counted racks.
Counted machines.  Two days, mostly the counting.


WHAT IS IN IT

    Racks in the suite                  44
    Racks occupied                      29
    Racks occupied by something that
      is still a customer               26

    Halvard                 ASIC, 11 racks          94 kW
    Crestone                mixed, 6 racks          23 kW
    Sightline (Dev)         12 render nodes,
                            2 racks                 11 kW
    Genomics core (Dr Ma)   14 nodes, 3 racks       13 kW
    Ours -- mon1, spares,
      network, staging      4 racks                  6 kW

    Measured total                                 147 kW

Three racks hold machines that belong to nobody.  Two are Vail's, boxed by Toby
in February 2015 and never collected, and I have telephoned them twice.  One is
ours and is full of things we have not thrown away.


WHAT WE SAID WE WOULD WATCH, AND WHAT WE WATCH

This is the part I did not enjoy.

In February 2014 I wrote: "Per-cabinet draw from the PDUs, plus suite total
against the 180 kW floor and the 300 kW ceiling.  I want to know before the
facility tells me."

What we have is one line in nwcheck.conf:

    suite-c-pdu         cabinet_draw   209.0  15

One number for the whole room.  The per-cabinet half was never done.  I wrote
the requirement, Priya put in the check I asked for, and I never went back and
noticed that I had asked for half of it.

    209 is what the room was committed to draw in February 2014.  It has been
    209 since the day the suite opened and nobody has changed it, including me.

    The room draws 147.

    The check allows fifteen per cent either way, which is 178 to 240.  So it
    has been saying the room is wrong since some time in 2014, and because
    nwcheck only mails when a check changes state, it said so once and has been
    quiet ever since.

I asked Wes how long.  He ran `nwtrend -a suite-c-pdu cabinet_draw` and read it
back to me.  The last time that check passed was **11 July 2014**.

Four years and one month of a red check that nobody has seen, in the room I
said I wanted to know about before the facility told me.

Nothing bad came of it.  The facility has never rung me about the floor,
because we have been under it, not over it -- which is its own problem and is
the next section.  But if we had gone over, that check would not have been the
thing that told us.  It had already stopped being able to tell us anything.


THE TEN RIGS

While I was comparing what is in the room against what nwcheck.conf says is in
the room, ten of Gary Lindqvist's rigs are still in the file.  gl-rig01 to
gl-rig10, under the compute-hosting section, below a comment about Sightline's
scratch disks.

The header that says "Gary left in January 2015.  Nothing under it now" is a
hundred lines further up in the same file.

They are checks against machines that left the building in January 2015.  Same
story: red since then, mailed once, quiet since.  Wes has taken them out.

I am not going to make more of this than it is.  It is three lines of
housekeeping and it took him a minute.  It is in here because it is how I found
the first thing.


THE ANSWER TO JOHN'S QUESTION

Three numbers, and he should use the third.

    300 kW      The ceiling in the lease.  Not real.

    200 kW      What the room will take if the racks are dense, which
                I put at about that in 2014 and have not changed my mind
                about.  We designed for 12 kW a rack.  What people are
                buying now still wants 17 to 20.

    50 kW       What we can take today, in racks that are ready, without
                spending anything or moving anybody.

The gap between 200 and 147+50 is not free.  Getting the rest means PDU work
and distribution work in racks that are currently fed for 12 kW, and it means
doing it in a live room around customers who are paying.  I can price it.  I
have not, because nobody has asked me to and because it is not the answer to
the question John was asked.

    So: **about fifty kilowatts, and six to eight weeks for anything that needs
    a rack we have not already got power to.**  Less if it is one cabinet and
    they are not fussy where it goes.

Say fifty.  If we are wrong it is wrong in our favour, and I would rather tell
somebody the number went up.


WHAT I AM DOING ABOUT THE MONITORING

The small half, and only the small half.

Per-cabinet draw, which is what I asked for in 2014.  The check already takes a
PDU and an expected number; there was never any code to write.  Five lines, one
per customer group plus one for ours, with the numbers I measured this week.
The suite total stays and gets a figure that is true.

    The bands are not all the same and that is deliberate.  Halvard is ASIC and
    draws the same at four in the morning as at four in the afternoon, so a tight
    band catches a dead rack.  Dev's render nodes idle
    between jobs and Dr Ma's run in bursts when somebody submits, so those want
    forty per cent or they will cry wolf every evening.  A forty per cent band
    is worth less than a ten per cent band.  It is worth more than a check
    everybody has learned to ignore, which is what we had.

    This does not tell me what the room will hold.  I still have to walk it.
    What it does is tell me when a number I wrote down stops being true, which
    is the thing that did not happen for four years.

I am not building a capacity model.  I am not putting the room in a database.
If somebody wants to know the numbers they can read the config, which is the
thing that runs, and Alice settled that argument in 2011.


WHAT THIS DOES NOT FIX

The same thing it did not fix in 2014, and I will keep writing it down until it
is not true.

I am the only person here who can walk that room and tell you what it will
hold.  Toby can read a PDU, and he counted with me, and he is better at the
physical work than I am.  He cannot tell you whether a rack fed for twelve will
take twenty, or what it costs to change that, or whether the facility is
telling the truth about what it will sell us.

    I took two days to answer a question John needed answered in an afternoon,
    and one of his four had already been quoted by somebody else.

That is not a monitoring problem and no amount of config fixes it.


WHAT WES FOUND WHEN HE WROTE THE TEST
                                                    3 September 2018

I said ten per cent on Halvard was tight enough to catch a dead rack.  It is
not, and Wes proved it before he committed it.

Halvard is ninety-four kilowatts across eleven racks.  One rack is eight and a
half.  Ten per cent of ninety-four is nine and a half.  So a rack can fail and
the check stays green, which is the number I was most confident about in this
document and it was wrong by arithmetic I could have done on the way to the car.

    He wrote a test that drops the cabinet by one rack and asserts the check
    fires.  It did not fire.  That is the test doing its job on the day it was
    written, which is the first time that has happened here.

Halvard is on five per cent now.  Five is defensible because ASIC draw really is
flat -- it is the whole reason the cabinet_draw check exists and the reason it
was written for Gary's rigs in 2013.  A five per cent band on a bursty cabinet
would be useless; on this one it is the correct answer.

The general form of my mistake, which is worth more than the fix: **a band is a
percentage of the group, and the bigger the group the less a band can see.**
Eleven racks under one number cannot show me one rack.  Five per cent gets me
one rack of eleven.  It would not get me one node of fourteen in Dr Ma's
cabinets, and nothing short of per-rack metering will, and we are not buying
per-rack metering to watch fourteen nodes.

I have written that down rather than fixed it.  -- MR
