CAIRNWELL TECHNOLOGIES
Summit Ticketing -- incident, Thursday 15 July 2010

Prepared by:  Alice Chen
Date:         July 16, 2010
Status:       Internal. Written the morning after.

Customers could not reliably complete purchases between roughly 19:20 and
20:34 on Thursday evening. Both servers were up throughout. Our monitoring
did not tell us.


WHAT I CAN ESTABLISH

    18:47   Mark mailed ops@ -- "pushing a change to the confirmation page
            tonight, nothing big". That is the whole message.

    19:0x   Summit opened sales for a Boulder Theater on-sale. I have this
            from Laura, not from a system.

    19:22   First 500s on POST /order/confirm in WEB1's Apache log.

    19:26   cwcheck: web1 mysql FAIL. Recovered 19:27. Failed again 19:29.
            Between 19:26 and 20:31 that check changed state 23 times and
            mailed me 23 times.

    19:41   Laura called John. Customers were mailing her. John called me.

    19:55   I was on WEB1.

    19:57   SHOW PROCESSLIST. Captured, see below.

    20:11   I called Mark.

    20:29   Mark replaced the confirmation page with the previous copy from
            his machine.

    20:34   Purchases completing normally. No further alerts.

Roughly seventy minutes. I cannot say how many purchases failed. The
application does not record a failed order anywhere I can find, which is its
own finding.


WHAT THE PROCESSLIST SHOWED

Sixty-one connections. Fifty-three of them in state "Locked", all of them
INSERT or UPDATE against summit_prod.orders. One connection running, held for
41 seconds at the time I looked:

    SELECT o.*, e.name FROM orders o JOIN events e ON e.id = o.event_id
    WHERE o.email = '...' ORDER BY o.created DESC LIMIT 5

orders is MyISAM. MyISAM locks the whole table. A SELECT that takes forty
seconds holds a read lock on orders for forty seconds, and every purchase in
that window queues behind it. When the queue got long enough we ran out of
connections -- /var/log/mysqld.log has "Too many connections" from 19:31
onward, max_connections is 100.

EXPLAIN on that query this morning: no index on orders.email. 1.9 million rows,
full table scan. On a quiet evening it returns in under a second because the
table is in the key cache and nobody else is writing. Under an on-sale it is
forty.

That is the mechanism. I am confident about it because I watched it happening.


WHAT I CANNOT ESTABLISH

Whether that query is new.

The file mtime on confirm.php is 18:44 yesterday, which matches Mark's mail.
Mark says he added the recent-orders block to the confirmation page last night
and that it was not there before. There is no source control, so his word and
the mtime are what exist. Both are consistent and neither is proof.

I have no evidence at all about how the query performed before last night,
because there is no slow query log and there never has been.


ON THE MARCH OUTAGE

This looks like March. Customers could not buy, the servers were up, somebody
could load a page, and it went away.

It is not evidence about March. Nothing was preserved from March. A mechanism
that explains this incident does not establish that it explains that one, and
I am writing this down because the temptation to close March on the strength of
tonight is going to be strong and it should be resisted.


WHAT OUR MONITORING DID AND DID NOT DO

It told us MySQL was intermittently unreachable. That is true and it is nearly
useless -- by the time the database stops accepting connections, customers have
been failing for five minutes.

It did not tell us purchases were failing. We check that the home page contains
the word "Summit". The home page was fine for the entire incident. We were
green on the thing the customer cares about and red on a symptom.

The state-change mail was worse than useless. I built it so a stuck failure
mails once instead of every five minutes. A flapping check does the opposite:
23 mails in an hour, which is the thing I was trying to avoid, arriving by the
mechanism I built to avoid it. I did not think about flapping.


CHANGES MADE THIS MORNING

    Slow query log enabled on WEB1, long_query_time 2. This should have been
    on since May and the only reason it was not is that nobody asked.

    New check, mysql_threads: warns at 60 connections in use, criticals at 85.
    That would have mailed me at about 19:24, two minutes before the first
    mysql failure and six minutes ahead of Laura's phone call.

    cwcheck now suppresses repeat mail for a check that changes state more than
    three times in fifteen minutes, and says so in the one mail it does send.

Not done, deliberately:

    No index on orders.email. Adding an index to a 1.9 million row MyISAM table
    locks it for the duration. Not during selling season. It goes on the list.

    No check that actually completes a purchase. It is the right check and I do
    not have a safe way to do it against production without creating real
    orders. I have asked Mark whether there is a test event we could use.


WHAT THIS SAYS ABOUT THE ARRANGEMENT

The responsibility line held. Nobody argued about whose problem it was. We
investigated, established it was the application, and handed it to Mark, and
he fixed it. That is what John sold Laura in April and it is what happened.

The notice we asked Mark for is technically what we got. "Nothing big" told me
nothing. I do not think he was being careless -- he genuinely does not know
which of his changes can affect the database under load, and asking him to
know that is asking him to be a different kind of engineer. Asking him to tell
us which files he touched would cost him nothing and would have saved me
fifteen minutes last night.

John spent twenty minutes on the phone with Laura while I worked, and told me
afterward he had nothing to say to her except that I was looking at it. He is
right that this is a problem.
